Add blog post on Java Regular Expressions (#1120)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-03-30-java-regex.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "A Quick Guide to Java Regular Expressions"
author: karl-hughes
by: contractor
communities: [java]

> description: ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use regular expressions to define a pattern for searching or manipulating strings in Java."
```

> tags: []

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [java]
```

tweets:

> - ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "🛠  Regular expressions are all around us.🔩  It’s useful to know how to use #regex well. 🛠  Build regular expressions in Java, with a little help from our latest tutorial."
```

Author: I don't think it's possible to do multi-line tweets in the front matter.

- ""
- ""
image:
type: awareness
---

> Whether you're coding, using a search engine, searching and replacing text in text editor, or using the command-line utilities `grep`, `sed`, and `awk` in Linux, you're using regular expressions (also known as "regex" or "regexp"). Yes, they're everywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether you're coding, using a search engine, searching and replacing text in a text editor, or using the command-line utilities `grep`, `sed`, and `awk` in Linux, you're using regular expressions (also known as "regex" or "regexp"). Yes, they're everywhere.
```
typo

> A regular expression is a sequence of characters used to describe a text pattern. Working with regular expressions is rarelydescribed as fun, but they are useful to help solve various problems while coding a feature, usually to find and replace operations with strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A regular expression is a sequence of characters used to describe a text pattern. Working with regular expressions is rarely described as fun, but they are useful for various problems while coding a feature, such as finding and replacing operations with strings.
```
add space, streamline long sentence.

When coding a solution using regular expressions, you typically use the built-in libraries provided by the programming language you're using. Java is no exception. It includes support for regular expressions using classes in the `java.util.regex` package.

> In this article, you'll learn how to use regular expressions to define a pattern for searching or manipulating strings in Java. You can find [the GitHub repository for the code in this article here](https://github.com/karllhughes/RegexExamples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, you'll learn how to use regular expressions to define a pattern for searching or manipulating strings in Java. You can find [the GitHub repository for the code in this article here](https://github.com/oktadev/java-regex-examples).
```
update to oktadev url

{% include toc.md %}

## The what and why of regular expressions

> So, what are regular expressions? Wikipediadefines a [regular expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) as "a sequence of characters that specifies a search pattern in text."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, what are regular expressions? Wikipedia defines a [regular expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) as "a sequence of characters that specifies a search pattern in text."
```
add space

*         Match flags, a bit mask that may include
*         {@link #CASE_INSENSITIVE}, {@link #MULTILINE}, {@link #DOTALL},
*         {@link #UNICODE_CASE}, {@link #CANON_EQ}, {@link #UNIX_LINES},
*         {@link #LITERAL}, {@link #UNICODE_CHARACTER_CLASS}
*         and {@link #COMMENTS}
*
* @return the given regular expression compiled into a pattern with the given flags
*/
public static Pattern compile(String regex, int flags) {
    return new Pattern(regex, flags);
}
 ```

**`Matcher`:** This class also has no public constructor, and the object of this class is constructed by invoking the `matcher()` method on a `Pattern` class object. The `Matcher` object will match the given input against a given pattern.

**`PatternSyntaxException`:** This class throws an unchecked exception to indicate a syntax error in a regular-expression pattern.

The typical code flow of working with a regular expression in Java is shown below.

We first create a `Pattern` object by invoking its static `compile()` method, and then we pass it a pattern, i.e., string literal Java, as the first input parameter. The second input parameter, `Pattern.CASE_INSENSITIVE`, enables case-insensitive matching.

> Next, we create an object of the `Matcher` class by calling the `Pattern` object's `matcher()` method. We are also passing the text we want to check for matches: if there is a match, the program prints `true`, and `false` if there isn't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we create an object of the `Matcher` class by calling the `Pattern` object's `matcher()` method. We are also passing the text we want to check for matches: If there is a match, the program prints `true`, and `false` if there isn't.
```

Author: Since there's a colon right before this, are you sure it should be capitalized?

Reviewer: Style guides vary on this. Grammarly and other sources say, "When a colon introduces a complete sentence, you may capitalize the first word after the colon according to some style guides. Read on for details..." (https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-after-colons/) if it looks weird to you, i'm not over-attached to this... feel free to leave as it is.

	}
	/**
	 * And this test shows how to do so against the invalid input. This test should result in a failure.
	 */
	@Test
	void when_phone_number_is_invalid() {
		String regex = "^[0-9]{10}$";
		assertFalse(setUp("^[0-9]{10}$", "123456789"));
	}
}
```

## Alternative resources for building and validating regular expressions

Several resources are available to help you with using regular expressions. Here are three relevant for Java.

### Regexr

[Regexr](https://regexr.com/) is an HTML/JS-based tool for creating, testing, and learning about regular expressions. It's a good resource for building and validating patterns in the browser. One of the best features of Regexr is its Community Patterns feature, where you can search for patterns submitted by other users.

To use a community pattern, you must first select a pattern, click on its URL, or double-click the list to load the full pattern. You can also use the right arrow icon to load the expression or text. In the screenshot below, we have picked an existing community pattern for password validation. We have run some tests to ensure that it does proper password validation as per the regex.

> ![regexr image](https://imgur.com/XVfkqzK.jpg)

Reviewer: What's the best way to handle the imgur images draft.dev has provided? Can you rename/re-upload?

Author: Yes. Will fix.

### GitHub Copilot

Thanks to [GitHub Copilot](https://copilot.github.com/), an AI tool developed by GitHub, you no longer have to write your own regular expressions.

The following screenshot shows Copilot suggesting a regex for email validation. In the IntelliJ Idea IDE, we can press `TAB` to accept the suggestion.

> ![regexr image](https://i.imgur.com/xrPQWZI.jpg)

Reviewer: What's the best way to handle the imgur images draft.dev has provided?

Author: I fixed these by making these images part of this repo.

### JavaVerbalExpressions

[JavaVerbalExpressions](https://github.com/VerbalExpressions/JavaVerbalExpressions) is a library written in Java that helps to construct difficult regular expressions. You can add the following Maven dependency to add support for this library to your project.

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>ru.lanwen.verbalregex</groupId>
  <artifactId>java-verbal-expressions</artifactId>
  <version>1.8</version>
</dependency>
```

> This library uses a builder pattern to construct regex. Below is an example showing how to use it to play with regular expressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaVerbalExpressions uses a builder pattern to construct regex. Below is an example showing how to use it to play with regular expressions.
```
avoids the repetition "This library..."

```java
VerbalExpression testRegex = VerbalExpression.regex()
                                                .startOfLine().then("abc").or("def")
                                                .build();

String testString = "defzzz";

// Use VerbalExpression's test() method to test if parts of the string match the regex
testRegex.test(testString);       // true
testRegex.testExact(testString);  // false
testRegex.getText(testString);    // returns: def
```

## Learn more about regular expressions in Java

Regular expressions aren't exciting, but it's useful to learn how to use them well. They're also a valuable transferable skill that you won't only use in Java. This article showed you how to use regular expressions to define a pattern for searching or manipulating strings in Java. Here's the article's [GitHub repository](https://github.com/oktadev/java-regex-examples).

<!-- I didn't use an "okta" prefix for the repo above because it's awareness and not conversation. -->

> If you want to know more, these resources have more information about regular expressions and Java:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These resources offer more information about regular expressions and Java:
```
simplify

- [Regular Expressions for Security Professionals](https://sec.okta.com/articles/2020/04/quick-introduction-regular-expressions-security-professionals)

> - [Java Regular Expressions](https://www.w3schools.com/java/java_regex.asp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Java Regex](https://www.javatpoint.com/java-regex)
```
replaces W3schools link
